---
layout: post
title:  "Curtailment costs: paying for electricity you do not use"
date:   2026-01-25 22:00:24 +0000
---
Great Britain (GB) is expected to heavily decarbonise its electricity supply by 2030, as set out by the National Energy System Operator in the [Clean Power 2030](https://www.neso.energy/publications/clean-power-2030) report. It is anticipated that this decarbonisation will be driven by renewable inverter-based resources such as wind and solar power, displacing conventional thermal plant. One challenge associated with a low-carbon generation mix is the intermittency of supply and lack of monodirectional, predictable power flows at the transmission system level. The present transmission system was built to accommodate large fossil fuel driven generation at specific locations, this topology does not align with a shift to predominantly offshore wind, and other generators remote from existing equipment. Where transmission capacity cannot be securely managed, generation is curtailed at a cost to the consumer, and in recent years, this figure has exceeded £1 billion annually. Curtailment means that the generation which should be producing power is told not to because of the system around it already being at its current carrying capacity limit. The GB market works such that the units of electricity that would have been generated, were the generator not curtailed, are still paid for, even though they are not used. As demand and generation need to be met, this power must be purchased from elsewhere, generally dispatchable equipment such as combined cycle gas turbines. In effect, one unit of electricity is paid for twice and the first unit is not utilised at all. These costs are all subsidised by the consumer. Constraints are managed at boundaries; an example is the Anglo-Scottish boundary, which accounts for a significant portion of the annual constraint costs.
